A Record vs. CNAME

If you manage a domain or set up a website, you will sooner or later come across terms like A Record and CNAME. But what do these entries in the DNS (Domain Name System) mean, when should you use which, and are there alternatives? In this blog, we clarify the most important questions.

What is an A Record?

An A Record (Address Record) is a DNS entry that directly assigns a domain to an IPv4 address. For example, if you want www.my-domain.com to point to the IP address 192.168.1.1, this is done via an A Record.

Example:

www.my-domain.com   IN  A   192.168.1.1

But when should you use an A Record?

When the domain should point directly to a fixed IP address.

When you run your own server and want to connect the domain to its IP.

When you want maximum control over DNS entries.

An A Record can be set up in the customer area of the domain provider.

A Record for GitHub Pages & Co.

If you want to use a custom domain with GitHub Pages, you can also use an A Record. GitHub provides official IP addresses that your domain must point to.

Steps:

Open the DNS management section of your domain provider.

Create two A Records for your domain with the following IP addresses:

185.199.108.153

185.199.109.153

185.199.110.153

185.199.111.153

If there are other A or CNAME Records for the root domain, remove them.

Save the changes.

In your GitHub repository, go to Settings > Pages and enter the custom domain.

GitHub will automatically verify the DNS entry and establish the connection.

GitHub recommends using a CNAME file in the repository instead if you want to use a subdomain (e.g., www.my-domain.com).

What is a CNAME Record?

A CNAME Record (Canonical Name Record) is used to redirect a domain to another domain instead of pointing directly to an IP address. If the IP address of the target server changes, the CNAME remains unchanged.

Example:

www.my-domain.com   IN  CNAME   hosting-provider.com

When should you use a CNAME Record?

When you want to redirect a subdomain to another domain (e.g., blog.my-domain.com to mysite.wordpress.com).

When using a hosting provider or CDN (Content Delivery Network) that manages IP addresses.

When you want simpler management, as the target IP is automatically updated when changed.

A CNAME Record can be set up in the customer area of the domain provider.

CNAME for GitHub Pages & Co.

If you use a custom domain with GitHub Pages, there are two possible cases:

You use a root domain (e.g., my-domain.com) → Set up an A Record with your domain provider (see above).

You use a subdomain (e.g., www.my-domain.com) → You can either:

Set up a CNAME Record with your domain provider, pointing to yourusername.github.io, or

Create a CNAME file in the root directory of your repository, containing only the desired domain, e.g.:

www.my-domain.com

This file must be pushed to the root directory of the repository to correctly link the custom domain to GitHub Pages.

If you use GitHub Pages with a subdomain, you can either set a CNAME Record with your domain provider or add the CNAME file to your repository – but not both at the same time.

Can you use A Record and CNAME at the same time?

No, a single domain can have either an A Record or a CNAME Record, but not both simultaneously. A CNAME means that the domain completely points to another domain, and it is not allowed to have an A Record for the same domain.

However, a domain with an A Record can have subdomains with CNAMEs. For example:

my-domain.com       IN  A      192.168.1.1
www.my-domain.com   IN  CNAME  my-domain.com

Here, my-domain.com points directly to an IP address, while www.my-domain.com refers to it.

What are the alternatives?

If neither A Record nor CNAME is optimal, there are other options:

AAAA Record: Works like an A Record but for IPv6 addresses.

ALIAS or ANAME Record: A hybrid of A Record and CNAME, available from some providers for root domains.

Conclusion

A Record is useful when you have a fixed IP address.

CNAME Record is better when you want to redirect a domain to another domain.

You cannot use both at the same time, but A Records and CNAMEs can be combined for different purposes.

Alternatives like ALIAS or AAAA can be useful in certain situations.

GitHub Pages & Co. sometimes require a CNAME file in the root directory or A Records with specific GitHub IP addresses.

For subdomains with GitHub Pages, you can either set a CNAME Record with your domain provider or add a CNAME file to the repository – but not both at the same time.



